convenient at that time you were saying? Reserve
units were sort of few and far between and they had
not been re-established and there were no
armories really and the program was really in the
grassroots and there were some geographical
divisions in other words if you lived in one county
you had to go a certain direction to to meet there
were, I think they called them
reserve areas or some such thing. I lived in Hearn,
and the closest place that I could find to
participate in the reserve was in Temple, which
was 65 miles away. So there were four of us that
pulled our automobile and started driving back
and forth to Temple. And I think we met twice a month
there, not on a real regular scale, no pay, just met
for points and comradeship and just to keep in on
the know. We'd have speakers that had come that
were Army people, and we'd have people that knew of
the development in the military. It really was not
a real organized type outfit. And there was every
branch in the world in it. Oh, really? They called
it a composite regiment. You just came, and
somebody was designated the commander, and he
probably got a few little administrative pays,
but we got on the points. Well, what'd you do in it?
And this is from 1946 to 1951 then? That's right.
And what was your duty there? We'd be assigned
to... come up with a program for the whole group.
Maybe mine might be on building a highway bridge or
something along my line. And then we studied, we
took advantage of a lot of the correspondence
courses that the Army had. And we utilized those to
just enhance our knowledge and whatnot. But it
really was not Not really what you'd call anything
real constructive branch-wise. It really was
just a sort of a holding unit, just to keep people
together. And we did have the opportunity to go to
summer camp a couple of times. Did you get paid for
that? Yes, we did. We were on active duty then. I
mean, just like any other two weeks. But you didn't
go two weeks every summer because it was so
disorganized. You just went a couple of times in
those five years. I think I only went two times.
Then I think I went one time as a casual. I just got an
opportunity to be called and went up to Fort Hood
and served with an engineer battalion. So I may
have gone three times, but two or three, it was not
anything regular like it is now.
All this time, you were part of the reserve unit
attached to the Corps of Engineers, right? I was a
Corps of Engineer officer. Okay. But we were under
what was called Texas Military District, which
headquartered in Austin, and they administered
all the reserves. It didn't matter whether you
were engineer, artillery, infantry. It was sort
of a control headquarters. But it's called Texas
Military District. Okay. They maintained
records. Right. Now, as an engineering officer,
what relation did you have, or what relationship
did you have, your reserve unit have, with the
Corps of Engineers who built Somerville Dam?
None. None? Not at that time. Ever? Did you ever? We
did after we got in this engineer brigade, yes. And
when did you erect the engineering brigade? I got
into it in 51 or 52, I guess. 51 through 65, okay.
Right, okay. Okay. That's when they finally broke
down these county lines and allowed me to come from
Roberson County to Brazos County and let me join
this 420th Engineer Brigade. Right. And that's
what I'd been wanting to do for, well, it had been in
being for a couple of years. But why did they erect
the 420th? Spencer Buchanan, who is a consultant
here, envisioned the opportunity to come up with
an engineer unit and utilize a lot of engineer
reserve officers to start building the reserve
program in this area. And he got them together and
got the designation and started the unit. It was
his doings, basically, just in order to promote
the reserve program. And the Army Reserve went
along with this. Oh, yeah. I think by that time,
they were probably beginning to... have funds and
uh places and Korean war just yeah right around the
corner and it it started as a I believe as an
engineer group or battalion battalion or group
and subsequently got designated as a brigade so he
commanded it for its initial
birth and infancy and kicked it off the ground and
Most of the officers in it were engineer officers.
And he built a good program and started it very
constructively. And I went with it the first time I
went to summer camp was in 1952. They did not go, I
believe, prior to my going as a group, as a brigade.
So the first time it went to summer camp was 1952. We
went up to Mineral Wells, up to Walters Air Force
Base, and we built roads and little landing strips
and
oil tank pads and, you know, the gamut. He was a
stickler for getting up there and building
something that you could see and use. He was sort of
oriented toward the Air Force. In fact, we were at
one time called Air Force Engineer Brigade. So it
was sort of designated toward the Air Force. But we
began to do things that were were constructive and
instructive, and it grew in a pretty good hurry. It
blossomed. Okay, now let's get back to that
question. What relations do they have with the
Corps of Engineers since the early 1950s? Okay, we
would work, we would go to summer camp, and a lot of
the work we did was with the civilian Corps of
Engineers at a Class I installation, like Walters
Air Force Base has a, their engineer was called a
director of installations or some such thing, but
he was part of the engineering aspect of that
installation. And he'd have certain chores that
he was going to do with his own forces or contract
it, and we'd use our engineer people, and he'd
furnish materials. Subsequent to that, we did
some jobs as time went along with the actual Corps
of Engineers, things that they had that they were
going to have done and pay for, and we'd do it in
coordination with them to utilize. You'd do it on
like a summer camp basis? That's right. That's
right. What kind of projects? I mean, like did you
work out at Somerville or did you? No, we never did
work at Somerville, but we worked at, Oh, we worked
at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, Fort Chaffee, Arkansas,
Fort Polk, Louisiana, Bullis, Camp Bullis, Fort
Sam Houston, Fort Bliss.
up at Red River Arsenal in Texarkana. Anywhere
there was an installation that we could go and do
work that was constructive to us, we were very
insistent that we not make work type things. Build
something that they were going to tear down. Sure,
right. You can really tear a man's morale up to have
him go out and labor and sweat and build something
that he knows is going to serve no purpose
whatsoever. And one of the prime concerns that I
had as a brigade commander was, if at all possible,
never build anything that's going to be torn up
unless it was made to be torn up, something to be
able to explode or blow up or something like that.
We always wanted to build something that was going
to be utilized or have some utility.
We, the Corps of Engineers, I'm talking about
reserve units or engineer units, in my opinion had
a head and shoulders start on a lot of the other type
of military organizations, infantry per se,
artillery, the other people because we could
teach people skills that they could use to make a
living at. Now, an infantryman, he's a very
important part of the war, but you can take an
infantryman out and nothing that he learns at
summer camp can he make a nickel with. But we taught
bulldozer operators, motor grader operators,
crane operators, welders, divers. You know, just
thousands of skills and many of those people got
civilian jobs on the strength of learning it in the
reserve program and it was real easy back in the
times when it was hard to get people enlisting in
reserve units we didn't have much trouble because
we had a program that could pay them dollars and
cents and it just made a big difference I had never
thought of that aspect of it. And you could tell a
man when he came out to recruit him that he could
teach him skills that he could make a living with.
Pretty interesting to him. How many reserve
engineering brigades are there in Texas? Just
one. That's what I thought. There are four in the
United States. Oh, that's all. That's
fascinating. Where are the other three? Well,
there was one. Now, there were four. Now, two of
them have subsequent. There were four when? 1968?
Well, when I was in the reserve. Okay. Okay. There
were four, but two of them have been re-designated
as engineer commands, they call it, and they're
commanded by a two-star general. And we were not
fortunate enough to get one of those. Why do they
need a two-star general? Why were they
re-designated? I'm not real sure. The concept of
it was that they were going to give them broader
responsibilities in the event of emergencies,
and they were going to handle a broader area of
engineer responsibilities, less of a direct
responsibility like we had of actually
commanding the units. They would have an umbrella
type responsibility, like there was one in
Vietnam that that was responsible to the theater
commander for all engineer activities in
Vietnam. And it's just a bigger responsibility.
So they re-designated two of them as engineer
commands and then left two of them as engineer
brigades. Now, there's one in Chicago, one in New
York, one in
Vicksburg, and one in Brown, Texas, Vicksburg,
Mississippi. Why Vicksburg? The Waterways
Experiment Station. Now, that was one that was
designated as a command, and the one in Chicago was
designated as a command. Now, the one in
Vicksburg, and I think the reason it was activated
in the first place was they've got a big waterway
experiment station over there, belongs to the
Corps of Engineers, and they've got lots of Corps
of Engineer officers there. And I'm sure that's
the reason it was originally organized like this
one was here. But why the two were chosen for two
stars, I think it was politics, Senator Strom
Thurmond
Mississippi, or wherever you want to know that.
Who was from Mississippi? Anyhow, one of the big
armed forces man was... Eastman, isn't he? I don't
remember, but anyhow, we always thought that
there was a lot of politics in it, because we
thought we had about as good a run as anybody. Well,
that's something, though. There's four of them in
the country, and we're one of them. There's one in
Germany, and... It's under Seventh Army. And then
there was one in Vietnam. But that's on active
duty, yeah. That's correct. But full reserve.
Yeah,
that was a compliment to Brian to have one, and just
four in the States. Certainly does seem like it to
me. OK, let's talk a little bit about your career.
In December of 1946, you were promoted to major.
Then your next promotion didn't come for 14 years
until 1960. Why is that? Well,
there just was not an opening. We had a pretty
static outfit. People got in and they didn't get
out much. But it just was not an opening. I used to
hoorah that I was the oldest major in the United
States Army Reserve. But the opening just didn't
occur. The fellow got in a position where he stayed
with it. So, you know, I just never got the
opportunity. Well, did you ever get frustrated
about that? Oh, not really. So you never
considered getting out of the resource because
they didn't promote you? No, it was a real
satisfying job. I had several jobs during that
time, principally the brigade engineer, but the
fellow that was above me just stayed and stayed,
and so it just didn't come off. I was under the
impression that after you went up for a rank, then
you came under review. Uh, and after you've been
reviewed a couple of times, then they might not let
you stay in the... That didn't happen in the
reserve, or didn't over those years. It did not
happen, no. That was not part of the, part of the
program. It is now, though, isn't it? I think
that's right. I think that's correct, and it
probably should be. Uh, in fact, I think now, uh,
they limit certain positions to maybe three years
or five years or some such thing. Fortunately for
me, they didn't at that time, because I might have
dropped out of the program of necessity. Sure,
sure. In fact, I had to drop out a couple of times,
just very temporarily, because when I got
promoted to lieutenant colonel, there was no slot
for me. I got the promotion, and then the slot did
not... stay for some circumstance and I had to drop
out for six months or some such thing but I stayed I
stayed continued with the unit on an unpaid basis
just because I was interested in it and and then it
opened right back up and I got back in and when I was
promoted to a full colonel I think I got out just
shortly but Anyhow, everything worked great.
Well, that's the thing about your career in the
reserves. For 14 years, you're not promoted at
all, and then from 1960 to 1966, the matoric rise,
this one promotion after another. How can you
account for that? Well, here again, it's just one
of those things where when I got promoted to
lieutenant colonel, I got the opportunity to go to
command general staff school, which made me
eligible for... on up and very shortly thereafter
well the man who was in the full colonel slot well he
died so I was moved into that slot and then see I was
only a full colonel just two years or two years and A
little over something, a very minimum of time.
Three years. Okay, just under three, wasn't it?
Mm-hmm. And at that time then, Cliff Samang, who
was my predecessor, had mandatory retirement.
See, a brigade commander did have mandatory. He
had a time limit. It was either 30 years or five
years in grade, whichever came later. So he had
mandatory retirement. and I moved into his slot.
So, why they used to hoot on me, I said, once I got off
that major spot that I really went up. And it does
look funny.
In other words, there wasn't any time in grade? I
mean, you were a lieutenant colonel, um, just for
three years? There would have been. Then you were a
colonel for less than three years? That's right.
You didn't have to be a colonel for five years and a
lieutenant colonel for four years? No, I think a
full colonel, you had to be a full colonel 30
months, three years. I was right on top of it. I was
just barely eligible. Of course, I stayed a
colonel six months after I was assigned to the, as a
brigade commander. Right. But I was just under the
wire. How many officers did you have in that
brigade that were a similar rank? Similar rank?
Rank, yeah, that were lieutenant colonels or
colonels. Well, let's see. Only the,
well, there was only one colonel in the 420th. Then
there was There were two groups, and each of them
had a full colonel. There were only three. And then
there were probably five or six lieutenant
colonels. But just three full colonels in the
brigade at that time. Well, why'd they pick you
instead of some of the other colonels? Just
thought I was more qualified. That's what I like to
think. And another thing. I lived here, and the
unit was here, and I'm sure that had something to do
with it. But I know that Cliff Samang recommended
me highly, and I know that the higher headquarters
take the present brigade commander's
recommendations. I know they're evaluated. That
doesn't mean that they always go along with it, but
I do know that he recommended me. So in the fact that
I was an engineer officer,
I can't help but think they thought I was the most
qualified. Now, we talked about this for a few
minutes after the tape recorder was off
yesterday. And that is that you were appointed
district engineer for district 17 of the highway
department in the summer of 1966. And then six
months later, you were appointed general. Was
there any relationship there? Do you think that
the fact that you have this new position of
responsibility with the highway department
might have had some bearing on the fact that you
were made a general? I don't believe so.
The command position called for a brigadier
general. Now, the only question at that time, they
had a few surplus brigadier generals in the
reserve program and there was in fact when they
called me and told me they were signing me to the
420th this major general said to me this doesn't
necessarily mean you're going to get a promotion
because they feasibly could assign some other
brigadier general to sign this unit to take up that
slot in other words he's a surplus unassigned
officer somewhere, and if he wanted that unit,
they'd consider assigning him. So he said, that
doesn't necessarily follow that you'll be
promoted, but he said, I'm going to recommend you.
So the unit, it just called for a brigadier
general. If I was going to command the unit
continuously, then they almost had to promote me.
But within that six months time, they could have
brought somebody else in and relieved me and and
given him the unit, not one to be promoted, I don't
think, but if they had had a surplus brigadier
general, they could have done that. Now, did you
really tell what you were telling me yesterday
about how one day you got a phone call and the next
day... Well, I had been interviewed by my boss in
the highway department for possibly assigning me
as a district engineer for the highway
department, and The districts, the highway
department is divided in 25 districts. That's a
very prestigious job in the highway department.
That's lots of responsibility and lots of
latitude. Works with broad guidelines. And he had
interviewed me and he called me and I'm not certain
whether, he called me one day and the army man
called me the next, but On a Tuesday, I was called by
one of them and said he was assigning me as District
Engineer of the Highway Department. I was called
the next day, almost the same time of day, just
before noon, that I had been assigned as the
commanding officer of the 420th Engineer
Brigade, which called for Brigadier General. So
two days in a row, I got very prestigious
assignments. The greatest two years of your life.
Two days. That's right. Somebody said that was my
blue ribbon week, and it was. It led to great things
for me.
I had a marvelous career, both civilian-wise and
Army. I was at the right place a lot of times. I had
some excellent recommendations apparently and
got moved in some slots that were most rewarding.
Now let's move back to the Reserves right after the
Second World War. It sounds like they were
somewhat in disarray. That's correct. They had,
of course, not had any chance to regroup after the
war. Yeah. A world of people that were discharged
were sick and tired of war, army. They went here,
thither, and yon. And it was a matter of gathering
some little nucleuses for people to go to
responding to and building around. So it was
almost a total rebuilding job. And that's what
sounds like happened from 46 into today, as a
matter of fact. That's right. Of course, well, I
guess starting
in, I want to say now about,
middle and latter 50s and early 60s there was a
great emphasis put on the reserve program. Why do
you think that was? Well I guess the result of the
Korean War they saw the need for a strong reserve
and lots of monies were appropriated and built
armories and when you got nice facilities that
lends itself. Of course another thing was the The
fact that we still had the draft, and the draft
assisted the reserve program greatly. Sure.
Erroneously, people referred to reservists as
draft dodgers. And that was completely
erroneous. The reserve was a form of a man
fulfilling his requirement. The draft was
another. Now, it's true, I'm quite sure, that many
people knew they would be drafted and got in the
reserve because they could stay at home, they
could drill on weekends, they could go to summer
camps. But that was the law. I mean, that was legal.
But a lot of people got called raft dodgers for
getting in the reserve. But I'll tell you for sure,
we had waiting lines to get in. throughout the
1950s. Oh, yes. Well, it varied, but it seemed to me
like it started in the later 50s and in the 60s.
There were a few times that we had lists, and there
were some pretty stringent requirements on who
you took in the reserve. I mean, it wasn't unusual
to get a congressional on why you took so-and-so
over this person. What do you mean, get a
congressional? Well, an investigation. Oh,
really? Congressional investigation. No
kidding? People would write to the congressman, I
wasn't taken in this reserve unit, and I ought to
have gotten in, and you know, this type of thing. No
kidding. Was that more in the 60s or the war in
Vietnam? No, well, I really don't remember the
time frame, but it was during the time that the
draft was very active and people were... were
utilizing the reserve to fulfill their
obligations, and they wanted in. But it has
seesawed. There'd be times that you can't get them
in the reserve. Then there are times that you've
got a waiting list for reserve, and right now
they're having trouble again getting them in the
reserve. But the draft played a great part in
keeping the reserve program going. I would think
so.